
January 2016Since the 1970s, economic inequality in the US has increased
dramatically. And in particular, the rich have gotten a lot richer.
Nearly everyone who writes about it says that economic inequality
should be decreased.I'm interested in this topic because I was one of the founders of
a company called Y Combinator that helps people start startups.
Almost by definition, if a startup succeeds its founders become
rich. Which means by helping startup founders I've been helping to
increase economic inequality.  If economic inequality should be 
decreased, I shouldn't be helping founders. No one should
be.But that doesn't sound right. So have we just shown, by reductio
ad absurdum, that it's false that economic inequality should be 
decreased?  That doesn't sound right either.   Surely it's bad that some people
are born practically locked into poverty, while at the other extreme
fund managers exploit loopholes to cut their income taxes in half.The solution to this puzzle is to realize that economic inequality
is not just one thing.  It consists of some things that are very
bad, like kids with no chance of reaching their potential, and others
that are good, like Larry Page and Sergey Brin starting the company
you use to find things online.If you want to understand economic inequality—and more importantly,
if you actually want to fix the bad aspects of it—you have to
tease apart the components.  And yet the trend in nearly everything
written about the subject is to do the opposite: to squash together
all the aspects of economic inequality as if it were a single
phenomenon.Sometimes this is done for ideological reasons.  Sometimes it's
because the writer only has very high-level data and so draws
conclusions from that, like the proverbial drunk who looks for his
keys under the lamppost, instead of where he dropped them, because the
light is better there.  Sometimes it's because the writer doesn't
understand critical aspects of inequality, like the role of technology
in wealth creation.  Much of the time, perhaps most of the time,
writing about economic inequality combines all three.